Welcome to a Deep Dive episode. Today I'm going over
what actually matters in Google's Gemma four release — cutting
through the benchmark noise to what's genuinely significant about this
open-weights model family. Google dropped Gemma four on April second,
and for once the open-weights release cycle is moving faster
than the hype cycle can catch up. I've spent the
last couple of days working through the technical docs, running
the models locally, and reading the community reaction. Here's what
I actually think. The short version: Gemma four is a
genuinely capable model family. But the headline isn't a benchmark
number. It's a license. Apache two-point-zero — no asterisks, no
carve-outs, no monthly active user cap tucked into a Terms
of Use P-D-F. That's the thing that will matter in
six months, not whether the thirty-one billion parameter model scores
zero point three points higher than Qwen on G-P-Q-A Diamond.
Let's get into it. The Model Lineup. Four models, two
design philosophies. Google calls them the edge tier and the
workstation tier, and the distinction is real — these aren't
just different sizes of the same thing. The edge models
are called E-two-B and E-four-B. The "E" stands for "effective"
— Google's shorthand for Per-Layer Embeddings, or P-L-E. The idea:
rather than just having one embedding table at the input,
P-L-E adds a second embedding table that feeds a small
residual signal into every decoder layer. The result is that
a four-point-five billion effective-parameter model gets representational depth well beyond
its actual weight count. On quality-per-size benchmarks, it shows. The
E-two-B has two point three billion effective parameters — five
point one billion total — with a one hundred twenty-eight
thousand token context window. The E-four-B has four point five
billion effective parameters — eight billion total — also with
a one hundred twenty-eight thousand token context window. The workstation
tier has two entries. The twenty-six billion model is a
Mixture of Experts architecture — M-o-E — with only four
billion parameters active during inference. You get the quality of
a large model at the compute cost of a much
smaller one, in theory. More on the catch in a
moment. The thirty-one billion dense model is a straightforward full-parameter
model with a two hundred fifty-six thousand token context window.
Two notable absences: there's no replacement for Gemma three's popular
twelve billion parameter model, leaving an awkward gap between about
four point five billion effective and twenty-six billion. And the
rumored one hundred twenty billion flagship that pre-release chatter anticipated
didn't materialize at launch. Architecture and Benchmarks. Let me walk
through the three architectural moves worth understanding. First: Alternating Attention.
Rather than running full attention through every layer, Gemma four
alternates between local sliding-window attention and global full-context attention. Local
layers use five hundred twelve token windows on smaller models,
one thousand twenty-four token windows on larger ones. The final
layer is always global. This is substantially more compute-efficient than
dense full attention throughout — it's how you get to
two hundred fifty-six thousand token context windows without proportional cost
blowup. Second: Dual R-o-P-E. Standard rotary positional embeddings for local
attention layers, and Proportional R-o-P-E for global layers. The combination
is what enables reliably useful performance at two hundred fifty-six
thousand tokens rather than just nominally supporting it. Third: Built-in
Multimodal. Vision support is native across all four models —
not a separate variant, baked into the base architecture. Audio
support is available in the edge models. With Gemma three,
if you wanted vision you got the vision model and
made tradeoffs. With Gemma four, you just get vision. Now,
the benchmarks — and an honest read of them. On
M-M-L-U Pro: the thirty-one billion dense scores eighty-five point two
percent. The twenty-six billion M-o-E scores eighty-two point six percent.
The E-four-B scores sixty-nine point four percent. The E-two-B scores
sixty percent. On G-P-Q-A Diamond — a hard reasoning benchmark
— the thirty-one billion scores eighty-four point three percent. The
twenty-six billion scores eighty-two point three percent. On A-I-M-E twenty
twenty-six, competition math: the thirty-one billion scores eighty-nine point two
percent. The twenty-six billion scores eighty-eight point three percent. Genuinely
impressive numbers for an open model. On LMArena human preference
rankings, the thirty-one billion dense sits at roughly number three
among open models with an ELO score around fourteen fifty-two,
ahead of Llama four Maverick. The twenty-six billion M-o-E holds
an ELO around fourteen forty-one with only four billion parameters
active. Legitimately strong numbers. But here's the honest part. The
speed problem is real. Community benchmarks show the twenty-six billion
M-o-E at roughly eleven tokens per second — where Qwen
three-point-five thirty-five billion runs at sixty-plus. That's a five-times gap.
For interactive applications, that's felt by every user. Chinese models
remain competitive. On aggregate automated benchmarks, Qwen three-point-five, G-L-M-five, and
Kimi K-two-point-five are at or slightly ahead. Gemma four genuinely
outperforms in non-English multilingual tasks and human preference evaluations. But
"Gemma four beats the Chinese models" is marketing copy. The
reality is a close pack. And the two hundred fifty-six
thousand token context window has caveats. Practically reaching that limit
requires substantial V-R-A-M headroom. Your hardware will determine your practical
limit. Running It on Your Mac. The E-four-B quantized to
G-G-U-F is about nine point six gigabytes — fits a
Mac mini M-four with room to spare. Using Ollama, the
easiest option: you can run the E-two-B at about five
point five gigabytes, E-four-B at nine point six gigabytes, the
twenty-six billion M-o-E at eighteen gigabytes, or the thirty-one billion
dense at twenty gigabytes. For faster performance on Apple Silicon,
native M-L-X is the better path. And llama-dot-cpp works well
if that's your preferred runtime. For hardware guidance: a MacBook
Pro M-three with eighteen to thirty-six gigabytes of unified memory
— the E-four-B runs well, twenty-six billion is possible at
the high end. A Mac mini M-four Pro — E-four-B
with headroom, twenty-six billion works at twenty-four gigabytes and up.
A Mac Studio or M-three Ultra — all four variants
comfortably. One important caveat: give the ecosystem a week before
building anything serious. First-day Mac stability reports included some crashes
and edge cases that should clear up quickly. Honest Assessment
— What Actually Matters. Here's what actually matters — and
it's not a benchmark number. The Apache two-point-zero license is
the most important thing that happened on April second. Previous
Gemma versions shipped with a custom Terms of Use that
included monthly active user caps. Real teams encountered this and
chose Mistral, Qwen, and Llama instead. Apache two-point-zero removes all
of that. No monthly active user caps. No acceptable-use restrictions.
No royalties. Commercial teams can build on Gemma the same
way they build on Llama — fully, without reservation. There's
also a geopolitical angle: enterprise procurement teams are increasingly preferring
U-S-origin A-I models for compliance and supply chain reasons. Gemma
four being strong, Apache-licensed, and U-S-origin is genuinely useful positioning
that benchmark tables don't capture. Now the gaps worth watching.
First: fine-tuning ecosystem maturity. At launch, HuggingFace Transformers lacked full
architecture support and P-E-F-T couldn't handle the new layer types.
Give it a few weeks. Second: inference speed. Eleven versus
sixty-plus tokens per second is a real product disadvantage. Either
Google ships optimized inference kernels soon, or interactive applications will
feel slow. Third: no mid-tier model. The gap between the
E-four-B and twenty-six billion — where the Gemma three twelve
billion lived — is real. There's no obvious successor to
that sweet spot. Bottom Line. Let me bring this home
with four specific situations. If you avoided Gemma because of
the license restrictions — reconsider. Apache two-point-zero removes the blocker
entirely. If you're evaluating for a new project — test
the twenty-six billion M-o-E, but benchmark inference speed on your
specific hardware first. The gap between theoretical and practical performance
is wide right now. If you're interested in the architecture
itself — the Per-Layer Embedding approach in the edge models
is worth studying. Getting the quality of a much larger
model at a fraction of the compute cost, through architectural
cleverness rather than raw scale, is an important direction for
the field. If you're looking for raw benchmark supremacy —
the picture is mixed. It's a genuinely competitive frontier in
April twenty twenty-six. The Apache two-point-zero move is Google choosing
to fully participate in the open-weights ecosystem rather than hovering
at its edge. That's the actual story here. The benchmarks
are good. The architecture is interesting. But the license is
what changes behavior. Thanks for listening to this Deep Dive.
You can read the full written version, with benchmark tables
and code examples, at the link in the show notes.